21.2.0
======

New Versioning Scheme & Synchronization
---------------------------------------
The maintainers of Klio have decided to **synchronize** the versions of the packages that make up the Klio ecosystems. 
From now on, every package in each release will have matching versions. 

As well, we are switching to **calendar versioning** [#f0]_ and will target making monthly releases. 
The new scheme for all Klio packages will be ``YY.MM.MICRO`` with an optional modifier suffix (e.g. ``rc1``, ``beta1``, etc).  

Since we're moving off a semantic versioning scheme, going forward there **should not** be any general expectation of backwards compatibility between scheduled releases, although we will be clear about what changes are made in release notes and changelogs.  
When needed, we'll publish off-schedule releases by bumping the ``MICRO`` part.  
While we'll aim to keep those backwards compatible, it is not a guarantee.

Batch Mode, New Event IOs, Templating Configs
---------------------------------------------

As of version ``21.2.0``, Klio now has full support for running jobs in batch mode 🎉. 
And with that, a lot of goodies that can be used in streaming & batch.

New features include:

* Run a job in batch mode
  
  * Read how to easily convert (or otherwise simply toggle between) a current streaming job to batch :doc:`here </faqs/streaming_to_batch_conversion>`

* Event IO support for:

  * reading/writing KlioMessages to:

    * files (both locally and on GCS) (:ref:`docs <text-files>`)
    * BigQuery (:ref:`docs <big-query>`)
    * Avro (both locally and on GCS) (:ref:`docs <avro>`)

  * `Note`: reading from non-Pub/Sub event input is only supported for Batch

* Read multiple event inputs of KlioMessages (:ref:`docs <multiple-event-inputs>`)
* Support for templating configuration keys & values, and overriding configuration values at runtime (:ref:`docs <template-and-override-config>`)


Changes
-------

:ref:`klio-cli <cli-21.2.0>`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. include:: /reference/cli/changelog.rst
    :start-after: start-21.2.0
    :end-before: end-21.2.0

:ref:`klio <lib-21.2.0>`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. include:: /reference/lib/changelog.rst
    :start-after: start-21.2.0
    :end-before: end-21.2.0


:ref:`klio-core <core-21.2.0>`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. include:: /reference/core/changelog.rst
    :start-after: start-21.2.0
    :end-before: end-21.2.0

:ref:`klio-exec <exec-21.2.0>`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. include:: /reference/executor/changelog.rst
    :start-after: start-21.2.0
    :end-before: end-21.2.0

.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#f0] https://calver.org
